Psalms 97-105
This is a LibriVox recording. All LibriVox recordings are in the public domain.
For more information or to volunteer, please visit LibriVox.org.
Recording by Simon Wainwright
The Book of Psalms, King James Version, Psalm 97
The Lord reigneth, let the earth rejoice.
Let the multitude of the Isles be glad thereof.
Clouds and darkness are round about him.
Righteousness and judgment are the habitation of his throne.
A fire goeth before him, and burneth up his enemies round about.
His lightnings enlightened the world.
The earth saw and trembled.
The hills melted like wax at the presence of the Lord,
at the presence of the Lord of the whole earth.
The heavens declare his righteousness,
and all the people see his glory.
Confounded be all they that serve, graven images,
that boast themselves of idols,
worship him, all ye gods.
Zion heard and was glad,
and the daughters of Judah rejoiced because of thy judgments, O Lord.
For thou, Lord, art high above all the earth.
Thou art exalted far above all gods.
Ye that love the Lord, hate evil,
he preserveth the souls of his saints.
He delivereth them out of the hand of the wicked.
Light is sown for the righteous,
and gladness for the upright in heart.
Rejoice in the Lord, ye righteous,
and give thanks at the remembrance of his holiness.
Psalm 98
O sing unto the Lord a new song,
for he hath done marvelous things.
His right hand and his holy arm
hath gotten him the victory.
The Lord hath made known his salvation.
His righteousness hath he openly showed
in the sight of the heathen.
He hath remembered his mercy
and his truth toward the house of Israel.
All the ends of the earth have seen
the salvation of our God.
Make a joyful noise unto the Lord.
All the earth make a loud noise,
and rejoice and sing praise.
Sing unto the Lord with the harp,
with the harp and the voice of a psalm,
with trumpets and sound of cornet.
Make a joyful noise before the Lord, the King.
Let the sea roar in the fullness thereof,
and the world and they that dwell therein.
Let the floods clap their hands.
Let the hills be joyful together before the Lord,
for he cometh to judge the earth with righteousness
shall he judge the world and the people with equity.
Psalm 99
The Lord reigneth, let the people tremble.
He sitteth between the sherabims.
Let the earth be moved.
The Lord is great in Zion,
and he is high above all the people.
Let them praise thy great and terrible name,
for it is holy.
The King's strength also loveth judgment.
Thou dost establish equity.
Thou executest judgment and righteousness in Jacob.
Exult ye the Lord our God,
and worship at his footstool, for he is holy.
Moses and Aaron among his priests,
and Samuel among them that called upon his name.
They called upon the Lord, and he answered them.
He spake unto them in the cloudy pillar.
They kept his testimonies and the ordinance that he gave them.
Thou answerest them, O Lord our God.
Thou wast a God that forgavest them,
though thou tookest vengeance of their inventions.
Exult the Lord our God, and worship at his holy hill,
for the Lord our God is holy.
Psalm 100
Make a joyful noise unto the Lord all ye lands.
Serve the Lord with gladness.
Come before his presence with singing.
Know ye that the Lord, he is God.
It is he that hath made us, and not we ourselves.
We are his people, and the sheep of his pasture.
Enter into his gates with thanksgiving,
and into his courts with praise.
Be thankful unto him, and bless his name,
for the Lord is good.
His mercy is everlasting, and his truth
endureth to all generations.
Psalm 101
I will sing of mercy and judgment unto thee, O Lord.
Will I sing?
I will behave myself wisely in a perfect way.
O, when wilt thou come unto me?
I will walk within my house with a perfect heart.
I will set no wicked thing before mine eyes.
I hate the work of them that turn aside.
It shall not cleave to me.
A foward heart shall depart from me.
I will not know a wicked person.
Who so privily slandereth his neighbor?
Him will I cut off.
Him that hath an high look and a proud heart will not.
I suffer.
Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful of the land,
that they may dwell with me.
He that walketh in a perfect way,
he shall serve me.
He that worketh deceit shall not dwell within my house.
He that telleth lies shall not tarry in my sight.
I will early destroy all the wicked of the land,
that I may cut off all wicked doers from the city of the Lord.
Psalm 102.
Hear my prayer, O Lord, and let my cry come unto thee.
Hide not thy face from me in the day when I am in trouble.
Incline thine ear unto me in the day when I call.
Answer me speedily, for my days are consumed like smoke.
My bones are burned as in hearth.
My heart is smitten and withered like grass,
so that I forget to eat my bread.
By reason of the voice of my groaning, my bones cleave to my skin.
I am like a pelican of the wilderness.
I am like an owl of the desert.
I watch and am as a sparrow alone upon the housetop.
Mine enemies reproach me all the day,
and they that are mad against me are sworn against me.
For I have eaten ashes like bread and mingled my drink with weeping,
because of thine indignation and thy wrath.
For thou hast lifted me up and cast me down.
My days are like a shadow that declineeth,
and I am withered like grass.
But thou, O Lord, shall endure forever,
and thy remembrance unto all generations.
Thou shalt arise and have mercy upon Zion,
for the time to favor her, yea, the set time is come.
For thy servants take pleasure in her stones,
and favor the dust thereof.
So the heathen shall fear the name of the Lord,
and all the kings of the earth thy glory.
When the Lord shall build up Zion, he shall appear in his glory.
He will regard the prayer of the destitute, and not despise their prayer.
This shall be written for the generation to come,
and the people which shall be created shall praise the Lord.
For he hath looked down from the height of his sanctuary,
from heaven did the Lord behold the earth.
To hear the groaning of the prisoner,
to loose those that are appointed to death,
to declare the name of the Lord in Zion,
and his praise in Jerusalem.
When the people are gathered together,
and the kingdoms to serve the Lord.
He weakened my strength in the way.
He shortened my days.
I said, O my God, take me not away in the midst of my days.
Thy years are throughout all generations.
Of old hast thou laid the foundation of the earth,
and the heavens are the work of thy hands.
They shall perish, but thou shalt endure.
Yea, all of them shall wax old like a garment as a vesture,
shalt thou change them, and they shall be changed.
But thou art the same, and thy years shall have no end.
The children of thy servants shall continue,
and their seed shall be established before thee.
Psalm 103.
Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me.
Bless his holy name.
Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits.
Who forgiveth all thine iniquities?
Who healeth all thy diseases?
Who redeemeth thy life from destruction?
Who crowneth thee with loving kindness and tender mercies?
Who satisfieth thy mouth with good things,
so that thy youth is renewed like the eagles?
In the heavens and his kingdom ruleth over all.
Bless the Lord, ye his angels, that excel in strength.
That do, the Lord executeth righteousness and judgment
for all that are oppressed.
He made known his ways unto Moses,
his acts unto the children of Israel.
The Lord is merciful and gracious,
slow to anger and plenteous in mercy.
He will not always chide, neither will he keep his anger forever.
He hath not dealt with us after our sins,
nor rewarded us according to our iniquities.
For as the heaven is high above the earth,
so great is his mercy toward them that fear him.
As far as the east is from the west,
so far hath he removed our transgressions from us.
Like as a father pityeth his children,
so the Lord pityeth them that fear him.
For he knoweth our frame, he remembereth that we are dust.
As for man, his days are as grass,
as a flower of the field, so he flourisheth.
For the wind passeth over it, and it is gone,
and the place thereof shall know it no more.
But the mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting
upon them that fear him,
and his righteousness unto children's children.
To such as keep his covenant,
and to those that remember his commandments to do them,
the Lord hath prepared his throne in the heavens,
and his kingdom ruleth over all.
Bless the Lord, ye his angels,
that excel in strength,
that do his commandments,
hearkening unto the voice of his word.
Bless ye the Lord, all ye his hosts,
ye ministers of his, that do his pleasure.
Bless the Lord, all his works,
in all places of his dominion.
Bless the Lord, O my soul.
Psalm 104.
O Lord my God, thou art very great,
thou art clothed with honor and majesty,
who coverest thyself with light,
as with a garment.
Who stretcheth out the heavens like a curtain,
who layeth the beams of his chambers in the waters,
who maketh the clouds his chariot,
who walketh upon the wings of the wind,
who maketh his angels' spirits,
his ministers, a flaming fire,
who laid the foundations of the earth,
that it should not be removed forever.
Thou coverest it with the deep,
as with a garment.
The waters stood above the mountains,
at thy rebuke they fled,
at the voice of thy thunder they hasted away.
They go up by the mountains,
they go down by the valleys,
unto the place which thou hast founded for them.
Thou hast set abound that they may not pass over,
that they turn not again to cover the earth.
He sendeth the springs into the valleys,
which run among the hills.
They give drink to every beast of the field,
the wild asses quench their thirst.
By them shall the fowls of the heaven have their habitation,
which sing among the branches.
He watereth the hills from his chambers.
The earth is satisfied with the fruit of thy works.
He causeth the grass to grow for the cattle,
and herb for the service of man,
that he may bring forth food out of the earth,
and wine that maketh glad the heart of man,
and oil to make his face to shine,
and bread which strengtheneth man's heart.
The trees of the Lord are full of sap,
the cedars of Lebanon, which he hath planted,
where the birds make their nest,
as for the stork the fir trees are her house.
The high hills are a refuge for the wild goats,
and the rocks for the conies.
He appointed the moon for seasons,
the sun knoweth his going down.
Thou makest darkness, and it is night.
Wherein all the beasts of the forest do creep forth,
the young lions roar after their prey,
and seek their meat from God.
The sun ariseth, they gather themselves together,
and lay them down in their dens.
Man goeth forth unto his work,
and to his labor until the evening.
O Lord, how manifold are thy works!
In wisdom hast thou made them all.
The earth is full of thy riches,
so is this great and wide sea,
wherein are things creeping innumerable,
both small and great beasts.
There go the ships, there is that Leviathan,
whom thou hast made to play therein.
These wait all upon thee,
that thou mayest give them their meat in due season,
that thou givest them, they gather.
Thou openest thy hand, they are filled with good.
Thou hidest thy face, they are troubled.
Thou takest away their breath, they die,
and return to their dust.
Thou sendest forth thy spirit, they are created,
and thou renewest the face of the earth.
The glory of the Lord shall endure forever.
The Lord shall rejoice in his works.
He looketh on the earth, and it trembleth.
He toucheth the hills, and they smoke.
I will sing unto the Lord as long as I live.
I will sing praise to my God while I have my being.
My meditation of him shall be sweet.
I will be glad in the Lord.
Let the sinners be consumed out of the earth,
and let the wicked be no more.
Bless thou the Lord, O my soul.
Praise ye the Lord.
Psalm 105.
O give thanks unto the Lord.
Call upon his name.
Make known his deeds among the people.
Sing unto him, sing psalms unto him.
Talk ye of all his wondrous works.
Glory ye in his holy name.
Let the heart of them rejoice that seek the Lord.
Seek the Lord and his strength.
Seek his face evermore.
Remember his marvelous works that he hath done,
his wonders, and the judgments of his mouth.
O ye seed of Abraham, his servant,
ye children of Jacob his chosen.
He is the Lord, our God.
His judgments are in all the earth.
He hath remembered his covenant forever,
the word which he commanded to a thousand generations,
which covenant he made with Abraham,
and his oath unto Isaac,
and confirmed the same unto Jacob for a law,
and to Israel for an everlasting covenant,
saying, unto thee will I give the land of Canaan
the lot of your inheritance.
When they were but a few men in number,
yea, very few, and strangers in it,
when they went from one nation to another,
from one kingdom to another people,
he suffered no man to do them wrong,
yea, he reproved kings for their sakes,
saying, touch not mine anointed,
and do my prophets no harm.
Moreover, he called for a famine upon the land.
He break the whole staff of bread.
He sent a man before them, even Joseph,
who was sold for a servant,
whose feet they hurt with fetters.
He was laid in iron until the time
that his word came,
the word of the Lord tried him.
The king sent and loosed him,
even the ruler of the people,
and let him go free.
He made him lord of his house,
and ruler of all his substance,
to bind his princes at his pleasure,
and teach his senators wisdom.
Israel also came into Egypt,
and Jacob sojourned in the land of Ham.
And he increased his people greatly,
and made them stronger than their enemies.
He turned their heart to hate his people,
to deal subtly with his servants.
He sent Moses his servant,
and Aaron whom he had chosen.
They showed his signs among them,
and wonders in the land of Ham.
He sent darkness and made it dark,
and they rebelled not against his word.
He turned their waters into blood,
and slew their fish.
Their land brought forth frogs in abundance,
and the chambers of their kings.
He spake, and there came divers,
and there came all sorts of flies,
and lice in all their coasts.
He gave them hail for rain,
and flaming fire in their land.
He smoked their vines also,
and their fig trees,
and break the trees of their coast.
He spake, and the locusts came,
and caterpillars, and that without number,
and did eat up all the herbs in their land,
and devoured the fruit of their ground.
He smoked also all the first born in their land,
the chief of all their strength.
He brought them forth also
with silver and gold,
and there was not one feeble person
among their tribes.
Egypt was glad when they departed,
for the fear of them fell upon them.
He spread a cloud for a covering,
and fire to give light in the night.
The people asked, and he brought quails,
and satisfied them with
the bread of heaven.
He opened the rock, and the waters gushed out.
They ran in the dry places
like a river.
For he remembered his holy promise,
and Abraham his servant.
And he brought forth his people
with joy, and his chosen
with gladness, and gave them
the lands of the heathen,
and they inherited the labor of the people,
that they might observe his statutes,
and keep his laws.
Praise ye the Lord!
End of Psalms 97-105